Sorry, their time-
Anyway, it should be-
... their time hasn't been updated.
Should be 20 minutes.
So, if, if you could remind them, sorry, the agenda's out of date.
Um, it should... They've got t- uh-
Yeah, 20 minutes, wasn't
it? 20 minutes for the hearing and then five minutes for consideration.
Sorry
Yeah. Okay. All right. We'll bring them in.
Thank you. Uh...
Uh...
Oh,
is this the latest one? No, it's the same
one.
Uh...
Oh, that might be the new one.
Oh, yes, yes, this is the newest one, yeah. This is the new one.
Okay.
All right. Good afternoon. Welcome, welcome-
Welcome.
... to the committee today.
Thank you.
Appreciate you coming in on relatively short notice to talk to the Pacific
Resilience Facility Agreement. Obviously, we've received that international treaty
just recently, uh, and the national interest analysis alongside
that. Mm-hmm. Given the timing on these consideration
pieces, we always like to move efficiently.
So we have you in for 20 minutes today.
I'm sure committee will have questions, but we'll hand over to you to give some
introductory comments and talk through that.
Uh, you haven't got a written submission for us, is that correct?
Uh, that will flow later, yes.
Okay. All right. Over to you.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk to the Pacific Resilience Facility
Establishment Agreement today. Uh, my name is Hayden Everett from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, and I'm here with my colleagues, uh, Christine Lam and
Sofia Varu.
The Pacific Resilience Facility Establishment Agreement
will establish the PRF as a multilateral treaty level
organisation-
(clears throat)
... uh, to be domiciled in Tonga. The
PRF will utilize investment returns
generated from a capital base to make grants in support of
climate and disaster resilience in the
Pacific. Uh, grants will support projects that are
required to, uh, build resilience and reduce the vulnerability
and exposure of Pacific communities to disaster risks from
climate change and other hazards.
It'll be the first Pacific-owned and -led regional
financing facility for climate and disaster resilience.
And, uh, Pacific leaders have identified this as the
appropriate mechanism for supporting their, uh, climate and
disaster resilience ambitions. Uh, New Zealand
has pledged $20 million, uh, towards the capitalisation
of the PRF, and we signed the PRF
Treaty along with 15 other Pacific countries,
uh, in September '25 at the Pacific Island Forum
Leaders Meeting.
Uh, the agreement will come into force once eight countries have
ratified, uh, the agreement and deposited the
instrument of ratification with the Pacific Islands Forum
Secretariat. Uh, three countries have ratified the agreement so
far, uh, Nauru, uh, Marshall Islands, and
Tonga, the host country of the
facility. Uh, so parties to the treaty will include
all Pacific Island Forum members, uh, with the potential
for associate members of the Pacific Islands Forum to so
join. Uh, the, the PRF itself will be
administered by, um, and overseen by a board
of directors. Uh, and then there'll be a, uh, chief
executive and staff for the, the day-to-day operations of the facility.
Uh, our support to the facility is an important part of our role
as a responsive development partner to the Pacific.
Um, Pacific countries have consistently identified climate
change and, um, disaster resilience as one of the biggest
challenges, if not the greatest challenge, that they face.
And their desire to establish a Pacific governed and
managed facility has driven our, our
support for, for becoming a member of the PRF and
making a contribution. Uh, the agreement
itself has no domestic, uh, operation
in, in New Zealand. Um, as a, as a PRF
council member, we'll be required to attend the, the annual
council meetings. Uh, although they'll be serviced through
our existing regional, um, meetings that
MFAT, uh, attends. Uh, the Ministry for
Regulation has confirmed that the agreement does not present
any, uh, domestic legislative change obligations and
therefore does not trigger the requirement for a regulatory impact
analysis.
So in summary, um,
uh, the, the, the ratification of this agreement is an important
part o- of our contribution to the region's climate and
disaster resilience goals. And ratification is
important for our influence at the, the PRF
Council, um, particularly to support a future
application from, uh, Tokelau for membership to the
facility. Um, Tokelau is a associate member of the
Pacific Islands Forum, and the, um, establishment agreement
preserves a pathway for Tokelau to become a member
of the facility. Um, by being one of the
first countries to ratify the agreement, it allows us
to, um, influence, um, the ability of Tokelau to
become a, a member of the facility.
Thank you.
Excellent. All right. Thank you for that summary, Hayden.
Uh, do we have questions? Yes, the Honorable Ian Auger.
(coughs)
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you for that. Um, my only question is
around, uh, the challenges through the PIF, uh,
accepting that the PRF sits separate to the PIF.
Uh, we're satisfied that any......
any happenings or instabilities or otherwise in the, in the
PIF won't affect either the membership moving forward
or any of the functions and order processes 'cause I note in the, in the
paperwork that I've been rereading-
Hm.
... uh, that part of it is a report back through the-
Mm-hmm.
That's right. So, uh, at the moment the
establishment of the PRF is, sits within
the Pacific Islands Forum. So there's an establishment-
Yeah.
... unit there that, um-
(clears throat)
... is supporting, um, the establishment of the PRF
but, uh, at, at a point in the not too distant future it
will be transitioned over to Tonga and be
governed by the direct-
Rules-
... rules and requirements and procedures that you see both in the establishment
agreement but also a whole suite of, um,
policies and guidance that is now being developed.
Um, so the establishment agreement was sort of the first
overarching document and sitting with u- sitting under that is a
series of operational policies which, um, ourselves
and our Pacific countries are closely involved in
designing. Um, and I think that will provide the, the
protection and address some of the, the concerns.
But the avenue-
So actually-
... still comes through the PIF. That's right. Uh, correct, yep.
Okay. Thank you.
Loyal Trust.
Thank you. (laughs) You named me.
Sorry.
(laughs) Mr. Jeffs.
Laura McClure.
Sorry, I changed my name. To McClure.
Oh, okay.
I've had that for a wee while.
I love it. Um, so I've just got like a couple of questions
like around the finances. We-
... are committing the 20 million but-
Yep.
... have, what are the ongoing costs?
Um, or forecasted costs of contributions towards that?
Sure. So, uh, 20 million is our contribution to the initial-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, capital base. Um, we have not made a decision
yet on-
Yeah. ... moving forward, um, the future commitments.
Um, the, I think, you know, we want to see
this facility functioning and see how it
works in terms of disbursement of grants in the Pacific before making
any-
Sure.
... um, further, further commitment.
Okay.
Um, there's no requirement to pay an ongoing, uh,
membership fee to be, um, part of the-
Mm-hmm.
... part of the facility so our Pacific countries will
pay, uh, a membership fee but that requirement does not
apply to Australia and New Zealand because-
Mm-hmm.
... we're not receiving grants from the, the facility.
Okay. So, so some of the other island nations will be paying their membership in
order to get the grants?
Yep.
So, in a way the facility's going to act like a grant
distributor/hub for
potential collaboration amongst the islands on some of these issues?
That's right. So-
In theory.
Yeah, so-
Okay.
... um, the target is, uh-
Mm-hmm.
... 500 million for the, the capital base.
The-
... um, capital base will be, uh, the intention
is to largely preserve the, the capital base-
Okay.
... and use the interest for grants.
Right.
Uh, the interest will both support
project, uh, projects in specific countries but
also, uh, potentially regional projects.
Okay.
Next question, Dana Kirkpatrick.
Thank you. It kind of follows on from that.
Um,
I, I note that the, the 20 million is coming through the IDC
program.
That's correct.
Um, and so I guess my qu- follow on question from that is how does
this, uh,
agreement and what might come from it in terms of projects or
funding, um, sit alongside the IDC
work that's already being done in the Pacific by New Zealand, um, and
others of course, but, um,
what's the crossover? How does it, how do they work in tandem?
What's the... Yeah.
So, I think the key focus for this facility is
projects at a community level. Uh, so these are
going to be quite small, um, local projects in many
cases. Um, it complements a lot of the other work we're
doing through the, uh, IDC program in the, in the
climate area
as well as what others are doing. Um, the,
some of the, the larger funders in this space, for example, the Green
Climate Fund, Asian Development Bank, World Bank, uh, you know,
their focus is on those larger, um, projects.
This, uh, facility fills a, sort of a niche
which has been identified for community level, uh, resilience
projects.
Okay. Thank
Yeah.
Um-
Sorry.
Will there be any like financial reporting on like
projects and, uh, like the transparency on who delivers those projects, et
cetera?
Absolutely. So, um, that's what we're working, uh, through now in
terms of the, uh, guidelines and-
Mm-hmm.
... policies which sit underneath this establishment agreement.
Okay.
Uh, so there's a requirement, um, for regular
reporting-
Correct.
... uh, auditing, um, transparency as well as,
uh, what you'd expect to see around environmental and social safeguards
for-
Mm-hmm.
... projects. Uh, so, um, you know, we're drawing
from, um, some of those global facilities-
Mm-hmm.
... that, um, operate in this space to build a, a set of policies that are
appropriate for a community level grants making
facility.
Hm.
Okay.
I have a few questions. Uh, I might just pick up on one
that Laura McClure made before- Yeah.
Thank you,
Mr. Chair. ... in relation to the on, ongoing costs for us.
So obviously no commitment to an ongoing annual cost for us-
Mm-hmm.
... but from an estimate perspective-
... resourcing, staff-wise, is that likely to be the sort of contribution
we're making?
There'll be a, um, uh, staff time
obviously in terms of, um, you know, monitoring
our investment into the facility, monitoring, um,
what the, uh-... the facility is doing, you know-
And staff working within the facility?
No, not staff w-
That would be a contribution from us?
No, uh-
That's interesting.
... not staff working. So our only direct financial contribution at this
point is the 20 million to capitalisation.
Uh, there would obviously be, in fact, sort of staff time in terms of-
Yeah, sure.
... people receiving and reviewing reports from the facility.
Okay. So you mentioned that, um, we aren't paying an annual fee because we've
chosen not to receive any benefits from them.
Why have you made that decision?
The facility is essentially designed to
support, um, Pacific countries.
Yep.
So both, uh, Australia and ourselves have, even though we
will be members of the facility-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, we've decided not to, uh, take grants because the
purpose of the facility is to support-
Yeah.
... Pacific.
So obviously, the issue with that though is that it potentially impacts Tokelau's
ability, which they could, if we were a member receiving grants, they could
get it through that channel. Now the mechanism is we have to try and create
rules that enable them to participate as a soc-
Mm-hmm.
... in a associate member-
... which is unclear at this stage, whereas it would be certain if we had chosen to
explore that and could have, of course, refused or, or not sought funding for
any domestic aspects, but we will still have that
facility. Okay, on that?
The... S- yeah. So, uh, based on, based on advice we received, the,
the best approach for Tokelau was to, uh,
in order to retain the right for them to receive benefits was to
preserve that pathway for membership through the establishment
agreement. Uh, because we had elected not to receive
grants, it meant that Tokelau would be unable to receive grants.
So our interest was preserving that pathway through that
............................
Okay. And you mentioned that the other nations will pay an annual membership fee.
Mm-hmm.
That's right. Uh-
That seems to be at odds with the text that says, "The PRF shall not
require payment of any amount to become, be or remain a PRF
member."
So there's, uh, there is a membership fee requirement.
Um, this reflects the, the sort of, uh, skin in the
game, I guess, that, um, it was recognised that Pacific
countries, uh, would,
um, pay a small contribution in order to be able to receive benefits under
the facility.
So how, how does that...
Yeah.
I mean, that seems quite a clear clause, but it's in, in the top-
Yeah. ... top of page eight, clause D, "Shall not require payment
of any amount to become-
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
"... be or remain a member."
Yeah, so I think the part you're referring to is about, um, contribution towards
the capitalisation. So it's not a structural requirement-
Mm-hmm.
... that a Pacific country has to make a payment-
(coughs)
... towards capitalisation, but a membership fee is a separate, and that, that is
required.
Oh, okay. Where is that? Sorry.
Just a minute.
Uh, while you're finding that, can you just give us an overview of
the, uh, likelihood of the 15 signatories?
Is it expected that all 15 signatories will become
members?
Yes. So, um, countries have
different pathways for, uh, working through the
ratification and approval process.
Uh, some, uh, for some Pacific countries it's simpler than
others, and we've seen that with, um, you know, the, the three countries
that have, um, ratified so far. Um-
Have any of them indicated that they intend to just participate as an
observer
as opposed to actually seeking membership?
No. All cap- All Pacific countries have signalled at this stage that they
intend to ratify. Um, the Pacific Islands Forum
is anticipating they will reach the eight
countries, um, uh, in order for it to become into
effect, uh, early, uh, next
year. Um, but uh, yeah, some countries are just on a slower
timeframe because of their domestic processes.
Um, so we-
(coughs)
... anticipate ratification will occur, um, throughout
next year.
So of the, um, all PIF nations, three didn't
sign, being Somo- Samoa, and New Caledonia and French
Polynesia. I understand New Caledonia and French Polynesia as French territories
might have had to apply different processes, different mechanism.
Why didn't Samoa sign?
Uh, Samoa would have been due to the elections-
Yeah.
... that were, um, occurring around, uh, around that time.
Yes.
So no one was able to sign on their behalf. Have they...
Is there any indication of whether they tend to or have
subsequent...
I h- I haven't heard anything to suggest they, they won't, but we can follow
that up and incorporate that in our, um, written, written response
to that.
Thank you. So the 500 million target, we've already committed 20
million. Who else has made contributions and to what level?
Australia is the largest contributor.
Um, Australia has, uh, uh, announced a hundred
million dollar, uh, Australian dollars
contribution. Um,
there's also, uh, a number of contributions coming in
now from European countries. Um, it'd be fair to
say that, uh, the 500 million target is relatively
ambitious and uh, PIFS is,
uh-
(coughs) ... working with member countries to, um,
fundraise for the, um, for the remaining
contributions to reach the 500 million.
Um, over, over the next year.
Uh, the US has, um, announced a contribution.
Um, the contributions from European countries
have been in the ranges of sort of three up to, up to 10
million. Um, the reality is-
Sorry, what was the US one?
Uh, US contribution is 20 million US, US dollars.
Um, although that's currently on pause due to the US,
um, uh, review of, um, its aid
funding.
Okay.What's
the anticipated cost to run the PRF
annually?
So, PIFs are still working through
the financial modeling, um, both looking
at, um, a range of scenarios for,
uh, the allocation of grants and how that
will be determined. For example, would that be based on
disaster risk or country size? And
as part of that, are also doing some modeling around the
administrative costs of uprunning the facility, um, in
terms of, you know, staffing size and, um, whether
they'll be
satellite offices in other Pacific countries who are primarily
domiciled in Tonga. So, th- those sorts of, um, models
are still being worked through.
Okay. All right, very good. When's the
next one?
So, our Forum Leaders meeting?
Yeah, um, it's in Palau. Um, I'm not
sure of the actual dates yet.
Is there likely to be some sort of investment committee or, or how is it, how are
decisions going to be made around this capital fund, where it actually invests and
who controls those decisions?
That's council involved there.
Yeah. So, uh, that, those decisions still have to be made.
There will be... Uh, in fact, one of the policies that sits under this
establishment agreement is an investment policy.
Uh, the expectation is that it'll be managed by professional,
uh, fund managers. The Forum Secretariat has been talking to the
World Bank and, and getting advice from their,
um, sovereign funds management team.
Um, but it, it will be professionally
managed.
Okay. Very good. Thank you. Any further questions?
No, that's good. Did you manage to find that one around the membership fee?
Uh, I think we'll have to provide more information for you in our written
submission. But the provision that you're talking about is referring to
capitalization. Um, so when it says that it does not require
payment of any amount to become a member, it's referring to not
requiring a-
Start-up.
Yeah. A start-up
authorization.
So, just to clarify, like, New Zealand's not looking, trying to become a member of
the council or anything like that?
So, we will be a member of the-
We will be.
... council.
Like, yeah, but not the
Board?
Yeah. Okay.
Uh, no. So, board will be, um, uh...
You know, those positions will be advertised, um, competitive
selection-
Selection.
Um, yeah. Directors-
Sorry, I just-
That's all right.
I just wanted to test that.
Yeah.
Yeah, so set up-
Um, so the, the piece I was looking at was the top of page eight, sub-clause
D, under the heading of finance and operations.
That's not capital.
That's not a capital contribution.
That's operation, isn't it?
It's true.
That requires a membership fee. Or cannot require a membership
fee.
Yeah, I guess there's also, um, clause C above that one, which
says that the PRF Council may decide that a PRF member must
make a financial contribution to the PRF.
Yes.
So they may.
Yeah. Yes.
But then it follows that up by saying they cannot...
Well, the next line-
... r- r- require payment to be, remain or become...
Yeah.
I
think we'll have to follow that one up in our written submission.
Yep, thank you.
We appreciate that. Thank you.
Yep.
All right. Any further questions? Wonderful. Thanks for your time. Great.
Thank you.
Great. Thank
you.